add job scheduler page (#3253)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/docs/deploy/job-scheduler.md

---
title: "The dbt Cloud job scheduler"
id: "job-scheduler"
sidebar_label: "Job scheduler"
description: "The dbt Cloud Scheduler queues scheduled or API-triggered runs, before preparing the job to enter cloud data platform. Build observability into transformation workflows with the in-app scheduling, logging, and alerting." 
tags: [scheduler]
---

The Scheduler is the backbone of running jobs in dbt Cloud, bringing power and simplicity to building data pipelines in both continuous integration and production contexts. The Scheduler frees teams from having to build and maintain their own infrastructure and ensures the timeliness and reliability of data transformations.

The Scheduler enables both cron-based and event-driven execution of dbt commands in the user’s warehouse. Specifically, the Scheduler handles:

- Cron-based execution of dbt Cloud jobs that run on a predetermined cadence
- Event-driven execution of dbt Cloud CI jobs triggered by pull requests to the the dbt repo
- Event-driven execution of dbt Cloud jobs triggered by API
- Event-driven execution of dbt Cloud jobs manually triggered by a user to "Run Now"

> The Scheduler takes care of:

Author: hey @schottj , wondered if we can turn this into a paragraph as it looks a bit weird having bullets follow bullets. what do you think?

```suggestion

The Scheduler handles various tasks including queuing jobs, creating temporary environments to run the dbt commands required for those jobs, providing logs for debugging and remediation, and storing dbt artifacts for direct consumption/ingestion by the Metadata API.
```

![Screenshot 2023-05-03 at 15 30 19](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/89008547/235947093-93bdcf08-1b59-456e-aa4f-ac38c88caa78.png)

Reviewer: works for me!

---
title: "The dbt Cloud Scheduler"
id: "job-scheduler"
sidebar_label: "Job scheduler"
description: "The dbt Cloud Scheduler queues scheduled or API-triggered runs, before preparing the job to enter cloud data platform. Build observability into transformation workflows with the in-app scheduling, logging, and alerting." 
tags: [scheduler]
---

The Scheduler is the backbone of running jobs in dbt Cloud, bringing power and simplicity to building data pipelines in both continuous integration and production contexts. The Scheduler frees teams from having to build and maintain their own infrastructure and ensures the timeliness and reliability of data transformations.

The Scheduler enables both cron-based and event-driven execution of dbt commands in the user’s data platform. Specifically, the Scheduler handles:

- Cron-based execution of dbt Cloud jobs that run on a predetermined cadence
- Event-driven execution of dbt Cloud CI jobs triggered by pull requests to the dbt repo
- Event-driven execution of dbt Cloud jobs triggered by API
- Event-driven execution of dbt Cloud jobs manually triggered by a user to "Run Now"

:::tip

> Actions in the dbt Cloud IDE aren't included in the Scheduler's handling. For example, dbt commands executed in the IDE don't affect the Scheduler. 

Author: ```suggestion
Actions in the dbt Cloud IDE aren't included in the Scheduler's handling. For example, dbt commands executed in the IDE don't affect the Scheduler or your run slots. 
```

> Actions in the dbt Cloud IDE aren't included in the Scheduler's handling. For example, dbt commands executed in the IDE don't affect the Scheduler or your run slots. 

Author: hey @will-sargent-dbtlabs fyi made this update - let me know what you think!

Reviewer: is this a common misconception for people? This tip made me more confused, and would prefer to leave out unless there's more context

Author: should've provided more context, sorry. @will-sargent-dbtlabs mentioned he has received questions from users on whether ide runs use run slots.

- **There must not be a run of the same job already in-flight** &mdash; The Scheduler executes distinct runs of the same dbt Cloud job serially to avoid model build collisions. If there's a job already running, the queued job will wait, and the wait time will be displayed in dbt Cloud.

If there is an available run slot and there's not an actively running instance of the job, the Scheduler will prepare the job to run in the user's cloud data platform. This prep involves readying a Kubernetes pod with the right version of dbt installed, setting environment variables, loading data platform credentials, and git provider authorization, amongst other environment-setting tasks. The time it takes to prepare the job is displayed as **prep time.**

Collectively **wait time** and **prep time** is the time a run spends in queue (or **Time in queue**).

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/deployment/deploy-scheduler.jpg" width="85%" title="An overview of a dbt Cloud job run"/>

## Job memory

> In dbt Cloud, each run of a job executes in a pod with a default megabyte (MB) memory limit. If a job uses up all of the memory, the pod is terminated with a "memory limit error" message. There isn't a memory limit set at the account-level.

Reviewer 2: Memory limits **are** set at the account-level as opposed to anywhere else (e.g. job-level).

Author: thanks @jeremyyeo ! i've tweaked the paragraph- let me know what you think. @schottj - i'm wondering if we should add more detail on what default memory MB is set for accounts? maybe too much?

**proposal**:
>In dbt Cloud, the amount of memory available for running jobs is set at the account-level, not for each job separately. Whenever a job runs, and it reaches the memory limit set on the account, the run is terminated with a "memory limit error" message.

Once the available slot conditions and distinct run checks are met, the scheduler will prepare the job to run on your data platform. The time it takes to prepare the job is displayed as **prep time.**

Collectively **wait time** and **prep time** is the time a run spends in queue.

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/deployment/deploy-scheduler.jpg" width="85%" title="An overview of a dbt Cloud job run"/>

## Job memory

In dbt Cloud, each run of a job gets its own [Kubernetes pod](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kubernetes) with a default megabyte (MB) memory limit. If a job uses up all of that memory, the pod is terminated with a "memory error" message. Each pod has its own memory limit, so having multiple jobs that use up some of the MBs each won't exhaust MB limit set for your account.

It's possible that jobs can consume a lot of memory in various situations, such as when bringing data back into dbt for processing, running a high thread count, or retrieving tables from schemas during docs generation.

<!-- leaving space for CI job treatment, runtime, warm up pods updates

-->

> ## Run cancelation

Author: will this section have more content related to different types of cancellations?

---
title: "The dbt Cloud Scheduler"
id: "job-scheduler"
sidebar_label: "Job scheduler"
description: "The dbt Cloud Scheduler queues scheduled or API-triggered runs, before preparing the job to enter cloud data platform. Build observability into transformation workflows with the in-app scheduling, logging, and alerting." 
tags: [scheduler]
---

Use dbt Cloud's job scheduler to streamline your data transformation workflows, build observability, govern data, and empower data teams to run dbt in production with ease. Create custom schedules to run production jobs and decrease operating costs.

The dbt Cloud scheduler queues scheduled or API-triggered runs, before preparing the job to enter the cloud data platform. 

## Scheduler terms

Familiarize yourself with these useful terms to help you understand how the dbt Cloud scheduler works.

| Term | Definition |
| --- | --- |

> | Job | A standard dbt Cloud job, which automatically executes dbt commands, tests, creates tables and views to your data platform. |

Reviewer 3: @mirnawong1 @will-sargent-dbtlabs I wonder if we can define job without using the word "job?" Here's my attempt, but let me know if you have other suggestions!
```suggestion
| Job | An action dbt Cloud takes to automatically execute dbt commands that run tests and create tables and views for your data platform. |
```

Author: i love this take, thank yoU!

> | Job queue | This is the place where jobs are held, waiting to be launched by the scheduler. They haven't started running yet, but they are ready to go. It's like a waiting area for jobs. |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| Job queue | The place where jobs are held, waiting to be launched by the scheduler. They haven't started running yet, but they are ready to go. It's like a waiting area for jobs. |
```

| Over scheduling | Situation when a job is currently running, but there are additional copies of the same job waiting in a queue to start as soon as the current job finishes. |

> | Prep time | Amount of time it takes for dbt Cloud to get the job ready to run your project on your cloud data platform. |

Reviewer 3: Suggest simplifying but also adding a tidbit about how queue time can vary.
```suggestion
| Prep time | The time dbt Cloud takes to configure a job to run a project on your cloud data platform. Prep time can vary depending on the complexity of the job and the amount of data being processed. |
```

Author: good callout!

> | Run | A single unique attempt to run a job. |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| Run | A single unique attempt to run a dbt job. |
```

Once the available slot conditions and distinct run checks are met, the scheduler will prepare the job to run on your data platform. The time it takes to prepare the job is displayed as **prep time.**

Collectively **wait time** and **prep time** is the time a run spends in queue (or **Time in queue**).

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/deployment/deploy-scheduler.jpg" width="85%" title="An overview of a dbt Cloud job run"/>

## Job memory

In dbt Cloud, each run of a job gets its own [Kubernetes pod](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kubernetes) with a default megabyte (MB) memory limit. If a job uses up all of that memory, the pod is terminated with a "memory error" message. Each pod has its own memory limit, so having multiple jobs that use up some of the MBs each won't exhaust MB limit set for your account.

It's possible that jobs can consume a lot of memory in various situations, such as when bringing data back into dbt for processing, running a high thread count, or retrieving tables from schemas during docs generation.

> Refer to [dbt Cloud architecture](/docs/cloud/about-cloud/architecture) for more info on its architecture and how the data flows.

Reviewer 3: Maybe we can provide more context about the link:
```suggestion
Refer to [dbt Cloud architecture](/docs/cloud/about-cloud/architecture) for an architecture diagram and to learn how the data flows.
```

<!-- leaving space for CI job treatment, runtime, warm up pods updates

-->

## Run cancellation

:::info Scheduler won't cancel API-triggered jobs 

> It's important to note that the scheduler will not cancel over-scheduled jobs triggered by the [API](/docs/dbt-cloud-apis/overview).

Reviewer 3: Suggest reducing the wording to get to the message:
```suggestion
The scheduler will not cancel over-scheduled jobs triggered by the [API](/docs/dbt-cloud-apis/overview).
```

:::

> **Over scheduled jobs** &mdash; The dbt Cloud scheduler prevents too many job runs from clogging the queue (or queue clog) by cancelling unnecessary ones. If a job takes longer to run than its scheduled frequency, the queue can grow faster than the scheduler can process, leading to unnecessary runs. 

Reviewer 3: I suggest removing because I'm not sure it add value.
```suggestion
**Over scheduled jobs** &mdash; The dbt Cloud scheduler prevents too many job runs from clogging the queue by cancelling unnecessary ones. If a job takes longer to run than its scheduled frequency, the queue can grow faster than the scheduler can process, leading to unnecessary runs. 
```

> The scheduler prevents this by cancelling runs that aren't needed, ensuring there is only one run of the job in the queue at any given time. If a newer run is scheduled, any previous queued run will be canceled and have a helpful error message displayed:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The scheduler prevents queue clog by cancelling runs that aren't needed, ensuring there is only one run of the job in the queue at any given time. If a newer run is scheduled, any previous queued run will be canceled and have a helpful error message displayed:
```

---
title: "The dbt Cloud job scheduler"
id: "job-scheduler"
sidebar_label: "Job scheduler"
description: "The dbt Cloud Scheduler queues scheduled or API-triggered runs, before preparing the job to enter cloud data platform. Build observability into transformation workflows with the in-app scheduling, logging, and alerting." 
tags: [scheduler]
---

> The dbt Cloud job scheduler is a powerful tool that helps data teams optimize their data transformation workflows, makes it easier to run dbt in production environments, governs data, automates your dbt jobs, and empowers teams to get results faster with less effort. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The dbt Cloud job scheduler is a powerful tool that helps data teams optimize their data transformation workflows, makes it easier to run dbt in production environments, governs data, automates your dbt jobs, and empowers teams to get results faster with less effort. 
```
The Scheduler is the backbone of running jobs in dbt Cloud, bringing power and simplicity to building data pipelines in both continuous integration and production contexts. The Scheduler frees teams from having to build and maintain their own infrastructure and ensures the timeliness and reliability of data transformations.

The Scheduler enables both cron-based and event-driven execution of dbt commands in the user’s warehouse. Specifically, the Scheduler handles:

- Cron-based execution of dbt Cloud jobs that run on a predetermined cadence
- Event-driven execution of dbt Cloud CI jobs triggered by pull requests to the the dbt repo
- Event-driven execution of dbt Cloud jobs triggered by API

The Scheduler takes care of:

- queuing jobs
- creating short-lived environments to execute jobs’ dbt run commands
- delivering logs which are needed for debugging and remediation
- storing dbt artifacts for direct consumption and ingestion by the Metadata API

The Scheduler powers running dbt in staging and production environments, bringing ease and confidence to CI/CD workflows and enabling observability and governance in deploying dbt at scale.

Reviewer: I'd consider replacing the whole upfront section w/ the suggestion above.

By using scheduler, you can improve the efficiency of your data transformation process, while also gaining greater visibility into its progress. You can use custom scheduling for your jobs, which allow you to run them automatically and save money by reducing manual work. It also provides governance policies to make sure your data is transformed consistently and meets your organization's standards.

The scheduler is a key feature of dbt Cloud that helps teams run dbt in production with ease and confidence, while also providing powerful observability and governance capabilities.

## Scheduler terms

Familiarize yourself with these useful terms to help you understand how the dbt Cloud scheduler works.

| Term | Definition |
| --- | --- |

> | dbt Cloud job scheduler | The dbt Cloud application that controls job execution. The scheduler queues scheduled or API-triggered runs, before preparing the job to enter the cloud data platform. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| dbt Cloud Scheduler | The dbt Cloud engine that powers job execution. The scheduler queues scheduled or API-triggered job runs, prepares an environment to execute job commands in the user's cloud data warehouse, and stores and serves logs and artifacts that are byproducts of run execution. |
```

> | Job | An action dbt Cloud takes to automatically execute dbt commands that run tests and create tables and views for your data platform. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Job | A collection of run steps, settings, and a trigger to invoke dbt commands against a project in the user's cloud data warehouse. |
```

---
title: "The dbt Cloud job scheduler"
id: "job-scheduler"
sidebar_label: "Job scheduler"
description: "The dbt Cloud Scheduler queues scheduled or API-triggered runs, before preparing the job to enter cloud data platform. Build observability into transformation workflows with the in-app scheduling, logging, and alerting." 
tags: [scheduler]
---

The Scheduler is the backbone of running jobs in dbt Cloud, bringing power and simplicity to building data pipelines in both continuous integration and production contexts. The Scheduler frees teams from having to build and maintain their own infrastructure and ensures the timeliness and reliability of data transformations.

The Scheduler enables both cron-based and event-driven execution of dbt commands in the user’s warehouse. Specifically, the Scheduler handles:

- Cron-based execution of dbt Cloud jobs that run on a predetermined cadence
- Event-driven execution of dbt Cloud CI jobs triggered by pull requests to the the dbt repo

> - Event-driven execution of dbt Cloud jobs triggered by API

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Event-driven execution of dbt Cloud jobs triggered by API
- Event-driven execution of dbt Cloud jobs manually triggered by a user to "Run Now"
```

The Scheduler takes care of:
- queuing jobs
- creating short-lived environments to execute jobs’ dbt run commands
- delivering logs which are needed for debugging and remediation
- storing dbt artifacts for direct consumption and ingestion by the Metadata API

The Scheduler powers running dbt in staging and production environments, bringing ease and confidence to CI/CD workflows and enabling observability and governance in deploying dbt at scale.

## Scheduler terms

Familiarize yourself with these useful terms to help you understand how the dbt Cloud scheduler works.

| Term | Definition |
| --- | --- |
| dbt Cloud job scheduler | The dbt Cloud application that controls job execution. The scheduler queues scheduled or API-triggered runs, before preparing the job to enter the cloud data platform. |
| Job | An action dbt Cloud takes to automatically execute dbt commands that run tests and create tables and views for your data platform. |

> | Job queue | The place where jobs are held, waiting to be launched by the scheduler. They haven't started running yet, but they are ready to go. It's like a waiting area for jobs. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Job queue | The job queue acts as a waiting area for job runs when they are scheduled or triggered to run; runs remain in queue until execution begins. More specifically, the Scheduler checks the queue for runs that are due to execute, ensures the run is eligible to start, and then prepares an environment with appropriate settings, credentials, and commands to begin execution. Once execution begins, the run leaves the queue. |

```

> | Over scheduling | Situation when a job is currently running, but there are additional copies of the same job waiting in a queue to start as soon as the current job finishes. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Over-scheduled job | A situation when a cron-scheduled job's run duration becomes longer than the frequency of the job’s schedule, resulting in a job queue that will grow faster than the scheduler can process the job’s runs. |
```

> | Prep time | The time dbt Cloud takes to configure a job to run a project on your cloud data platform. Prep time can vary depending on the complexity of the job and the amount of data being processed. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Prep time | The time dbt Cloud takes to create a short-lived environment to execute the job commands in the user's cloud data warehouse. Prep time varies most significantly at the top of the hour when the dbt Cloud Scheduler experiences a lot of run traffic. |
```

> | Run | A single unique attempt to run a dbt job. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Run | A single, unique execution of a dbt job. |
```

> | Run slot | Run slots control the number of jobs that can run concurrently: one run slot allows for a single job at a time. Adding more run slots enables multiple jobs to run at the same time. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Run slot | Run slots control the number of jobs that can run concurrently. Each account has a fixed number of run slots, depending on the plan tier, that are shared across projects in the account. Each running job occupies a run slot for the duration of the run, so purchasing more run slots enables more jobs to execute in parallel. |
```

> | Threads | When you run dbt, it creates a graph of links between models. The number of [threads](/docs/core/connection-profiles#understanding-threads) is the maximum number of paths that dbt can work on at once. The default value is 4 threads. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Threads | When dbt builds a project's DAG, it tries to parallelize the execution by using threads. The [thread](/docs/core/connection-profiles#understanding-threads) count is the maximum number of paths through the DAG that dbt can work on simultaneously. The default value is 4 threads. |
```

> | Wait time | Amount of time that dbt Cloud waits before running your job, either because there are no available slots for running jobs or because a previous run of the same job is still in progress. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Wait time | Amount of time that dbt Cloud waits before running a job, either because there are no available slots or because a previous run of the same job is still in progress. |
```

## Scheduler queue

> The dbt Cloud scheduler queues a deployment job to be processed when it's triggered to run, either by schedule or by API. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The dbt Cloud scheduler queues a deployment job to be processed when it's triggered to run, either by schedule, by API, by PR trigger, or manually. 
```

Before the job starts executing, the scheduler checks two conditions to determine if the run can start executing:

> - **The account must have an available run slot** &mdash; If all run slots are occupied, the queued run will wait. The wait time is displayed in dbt Cloud. If there are long waiting times, [upgrading to enterprise](https://www.getdbt.com/contact/) can provide more run slots and allow for higher job concurrency.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **The account must have an available run slot** &mdash; If all run slots are occupied, the queued run will wait. The wait time is displayed in dbt Cloud. If there are long wait times, [upgrading to enterprise](https://www.getdbt.com/contact/) can provide more run slots and allow for higher job concurrency.
```

> - **There must not be a run of the same job already in-flight** &mdash; The scheduler executes distinct runs of the same dbt Cloud job serially to avoid model build collisions. If there's a job already running, the queued job will wait and the waiting time will be displayed in dbt Cloud.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **There must not be a run of the same job already in-flight** &mdash; The Scheduler executes distinct runs of the same dbt Cloud job serially to avoid model build collisions. If there's a job already running, the queued job will wait, and the wait time will be displayed in dbt Cloud.
```

> Once the available slot conditions and distinct run checks are met, the scheduler will prepare the job to run on your data platform. The time it takes to prepare the job is displayed as **prep time.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If there is an available run slot and there's not an actively running instance of the job, the Scheduler will prepare the job to run in the user's cloud data warehouse. This prep involves readying a Kubernetes pod with the right version of dbt installed, setting environment variables, loading warehouse credentials and git provider authorization, amongst other environment-setting tasks. The time it takes to prepare the job is displayed as **prep time.**
```

Collectively **wait time** and **prep time** is the time a run spends in queue (or **Time in queue**).

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/deployment/deploy-scheduler.jpg" width="85%" title="An overview of a dbt Cloud job run"/>

## Job memory

> In dbt Cloud, each run of a job gets its own [Kubernetes pod](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kubernetes) with a default megabyte (MB) memory limit. If a job uses up all of that memory, the pod is terminated with a "memory error" message. Each pod has its own memory limit, so having multiple jobs that use up some of the MBs each won't exhaust MB limit set for your account.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In dbt Cloud, each run of a job executes in a pod with a default megabyte (MB) memory limit. If a job uses up all of the memory, the pod is terminated with a "memory limit error" message. There is not a memory limit set at the account-level.
```

> It's possible that jobs can consume a lot of memory in various situations, such as when bringing data back into dbt for processing, running a high thread count, or retrieving tables from schemas during docs generation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Jobs consume a lot of memory in the following situations:
- A high thread count was specified
- Custom dbt macros attempt to load data into memory instead of pushing compute down to the data warehouse 
- Generating dbt project documentation when a source's schema has a large number of tables
```

Author: @schottj small question - do we want to use the term 'data warehouse' or data platform? i thought it was data platform?

Reviewer: Let's just be consistent. "cloud data platform" is fine w me. I don't have strong opinions

Refer to [dbt Cloud architecture](/docs/cloud/about-cloud/architecture) for an architecture diagram and to learn how the data flows.

<!-- leaving space for CI job treatment, runtime, warm up pods updates

-->

> ## Run cancellation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Run cancelation for over-scheduled jobs
```

:::info Scheduler won't cancel API-triggered jobs 
The scheduler will not cancel over-scheduled jobs triggered by the [API](/docs/dbt-cloud-apis/overview).
:::

> **Over scheduled jobs** &mdash; The dbt Cloud scheduler prevents too many job runs from clogging the queue by cancelling unnecessary ones. If a job takes longer to run than its scheduled frequency, the queue can grow faster than the scheduler can process, leading to unnecessary runs. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Over scheduled jobs** &mdash; The dbt Cloud scheduler prevents too many job runs from clogging the queue by cancelling unnecessary ones. If a job takes longer to run than its scheduled frequency, the queue will grow faster than the scheduler can process the runs, leading to a ever-expanding queue with runs that don’t need to be processed. 
```

---
title: "The dbt Cloud Scheduler"
id: "job-scheduler"
sidebar_label: "Job scheduler"
description: "The dbt Cloud Scheduler queues scheduled or API-triggered runs, before preparing the job to enter cloud data platform. Build observability into transformation workflows with the in-app scheduling, logging, and alerting." 
tags: [scheduler]
---

The Scheduler is the backbone of running jobs in dbt Cloud, bringing power and simplicity to building data pipelines in both continuous integration and production contexts. The Scheduler frees teams from having to build and maintain their own infrastructure and ensures the timeliness and reliability of data transformations.

The Scheduler enables both cron-based and event-driven execution of dbt commands in the user’s data platform. Specifically, the Scheduler handles:

- Cron-based execution of dbt Cloud jobs that run on a predetermined cadence
- Event-driven execution of dbt Cloud CI jobs triggered by pull requests to the dbt repo
- Event-driven execution of dbt Cloud jobs triggered by API
- Event-driven execution of dbt Cloud jobs manually triggered by a user to "Run Now"

> The Scheduler handles various tasks including queuing jobs, creating temporary environments to run the dbt commands required for those jobs, providing logs for debugging and remediation, and storing dbt artifacts for direct consumption/ingestion by the Metadata API. **Note**: Executions performed in the dbt Cloud IDE aren't included in the Scheduler's handling. For example, dbt commands executed in the IDE won't affect the Scheduler or your run slots. 

Author: ```suggestion
The Scheduler handles various tasks including queuing jobs, creating temporary environments to run the dbt commands required for those jobs, providing logs for debugging and remediation, and storing dbt artifacts for direct consumption/ingestion by the Metadata API. 

**Note**: Executions performed in the dbt Cloud IDE aren't included in the Scheduler's handling. For example, dbt commands executed in the IDE won't affect the Scheduler or your run slots. 
```

- **There must not be a run of the same job already in-flight** &mdash; The Scheduler executes distinct runs of the same dbt Cloud job serially to avoid model build collisions. If there's a job already running, the queued job will wait, and the wait time will be displayed in dbt Cloud.

If there is an available run slot and there's not an actively running instance of the job, the Scheduler will prepare the job to run in the user's cloud data platform. This prep involves readying a Kubernetes pod with the right version of dbt installed, setting environment variables, loading data platform credentials, and git provider authorization, amongst other environment-setting tasks. The time it takes to prepare the job is displayed as **prep time.**

Collectively **wait time** and **prep time** is the time a run spends in queue (or **Time in queue**).

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/deployment/deploy-scheduler.jpg" width="85%" title="An overview of a dbt Cloud job run"/>

## Job memory

> In dbt Cloud, each run of a job executes in a pod with a default megabyte (MB) memory limit. If a job uses up all of the memory, the pod is terminated with a "memory limit error" message. There isn't a memory limit set at the account-level.

Author: ```suggestion
In dbt Cloud, the amount of memory available for running jobs is set at the account-level, not for each job separately. Whenever a job runs, and it reaches the memory limit set on the account, the run is terminated with a "memory limit error" message.
```

- Event-driven execution of dbt Cloud jobs manually triggered by a user to "Run Now"

The Scheduler handles various tasks including queuing jobs, creating temporary environments to run the dbt commands required for those jobs, providing logs for debugging and remediation, and storing dbt artifacts for direct consumption/ingestion by the Metadata API. 

**Note**: Executions performed in the dbt Cloud IDE aren't included in the Scheduler's handling. For example, dbt commands executed in the IDE won't affect the Scheduler or your run slots. 

The Scheduler powers running dbt in staging and production environments, bringing ease and confidence to CI/CD workflows and enabling observability and governance in deploying dbt at scale. 

## Scheduler terms

Familiarize yourself with these useful terms to help you understand how the dbt Cloud scheduler works.

| Term | Definition |
| --- | --- |
| dbt Cloud Scheduler | The dbt Cloud engine that powers job execution. The scheduler queues scheduled or API-triggered job runs, prepares an environment to execute job commands in the user's cloud data platform, and stores and serves logs and artifacts that are byproducts of run execution. |

> | Job | A collection of run steps, settings, and a trigger to invoke dbt commands against a project in the user's cloud data platform |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Job | A collection of run steps, settings, and a trigger to invoke dbt commands against a project in the user's cloud data platform. |
```

| Over-scheduled job | A situation when a cron-scheduled job's run duration becomes longer than the frequency of the job’s schedule, resulting in a job queue that will grow faster than the scheduler can process the job’s runs. |
| Prep time | The time dbt Cloud takes to create a short-lived environment to execute the job commands in the user's cloud data platform. Prep time varies most significantly at the top of the hour when the dbt Cloud Scheduler experiences a lot of run traffic. |
| Run | A single, unique execution of a dbt job. |
| Run slot | Run slots control the number of jobs that can run concurrently. Each account has a fixed number of run slots, depending on the plan tier, that are shared across projects in the account. Each running job occupies a run slot for the duration of the run, so purchasing more run slots enables more jobs to execute in parallel. |

> | Threads | When dbt builds a project's DAG, it tries to parallelize the execution by using threads. The [thread](/docs/core/connection-profiles#understanding-threads) count is the maximum number of paths through the DAG that dbt can work on simultaneously. The default value is 4 threads. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Threads | When dbt builds a project's DAG, it tries to parallelize the execution by using threads. The [thread](/docs/core/connection-profiles#understanding-threads) count is the maximum number of paths through the DAG that dbt can work on simultaneously. The default thread count in a job is 4. |
```

| Wait time | Amount of time that dbt Cloud waits before running a job, either because there are no available slots or because a previous run of the same job is still in progress. |

## Scheduler queue

The dbt Cloud scheduler queues a deployment job to be processed when it's triggered to run, either by schedule, by API, by PR trigger, or manually. 

Before the job starts executing, the scheduler checks two conditions to determine if the run can start executing:

- **The account must have an available run slot** &mdash; If all run slots are occupied, the queued run will wait. The wait time is displayed in dbt Cloud. If there are long wait times, [upgrading to enterprise](https://www.getdbt.com/contact/) can provide more run slots and allow for higher job concurrency.

- **There must not be a run of the same job already in-flight** &mdash; The Scheduler executes distinct runs of the same dbt Cloud job serially to avoid model build collisions. If there's a job already running, the queued job will wait, and the wait time will be displayed in dbt Cloud.

> If there is an available run slot and there's not an actively running instance of the job, the Scheduler will prepare the job to run in the user's cloud data platform. This prep involves readying a Kubernetes pod with the right version of dbt installed, setting environment variables, loading data platform credentials, and git provider authorization, amongst other environment-setting tasks. The time it takes to prepare the job is displayed as **prep time.**

Author: ```suggestion
If there is an available run slot and there isn't an actively running instance of the job, the Scheduler will prepare the job to run in the user's cloud data platform. This prep involves readying a Kubernetes pod with the right version of dbt installed, setting environment variables, loading data platform credentials, and git provider authorization, amongst other environment-setting tasks. The time it takes to prepare the job is displayed as **prep time.**
```

Collectively **wait time** and **prep time** is the time a run spends in queue (or **Time in queue**).

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/deployment/deploy-scheduler.jpg" width="85%" title="An overview of a dbt Cloud job run"/>

## Job memory

> In dbt Cloud, the amount of memory available for running jobs is set at the account-level, not for each job separately. Whenever a job runs, and it reaches the memory limit set on the account, the run is terminated with a "memory limit error" message.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In dbt Cloud, the setting to provision memory available to a job is defined at the account-level and applies to each job running in the account; the memory limit cannot be customized per job. If a running job reaches its memory limit, the run is terminated with a "memory limit error" message.
```

Jobs consume a lot of memory in the following situations:
- A high thread count was specified
- Custom dbt macros attempt to load data into memory instead of pushing compute down to the cloud data platform
- Having a job that generates dbt project documentation for a large and complex dbt project. 

>   * To prevent problems with the job running out of memory, we recommend generating documentation in a separate job that is set aside for that task and removing that task from all other jobs. This is especially important for large and complex projects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * To prevent problems with the job running out of memory, we recommend generating documentation in a separate job that is set aside for that task and removing `dbt docs generate` from all other jobs. This is especially important for large and complex projects.
```

Refer to [dbt Cloud architecture](/docs/cloud/about-cloud/architecture) for an architecture diagram and to learn how the data flows.

<!-- leaving space for CI job treatment, runtime, warm up pods updates

-->

## Run cancelation for over-scheduled jobs

:::info Scheduler won't cancel API-triggered jobs 
The scheduler will not cancel over-scheduled jobs triggered by the [API](/docs/dbt-cloud-apis/overview).
:::

> **Over scheduled jobs** &mdash; The dbt Cloud scheduler prevents too many job runs from clogging the queue by cancelling unnecessary ones. If a job takes longer to run than its scheduled frequency, the queue will grow faster than the scheduler can process the runs, leading to an ever-expanding queue with runs that don’t need to be processed. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Over scheduled jobs** &mdash; The dbt Cloud scheduler prevents too many job runs from clogging the queue by canceling unnecessary ones. If a job takes longer to run than its scheduled frequency, the queue will grow faster than the scheduler can process the runs, leading to an ever-expanding queue with runs that don’t need to be processed. 
```

> The scheduler prevents queue clog by cancelling runs that aren't needed, ensuring there is only one run of the job in the queue at any given time. If a newer run is scheduled, any previous queued run will be canceled and have a helpful error message displayed:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The scheduler prevents queue clog by canceling runs that aren't needed, ensuring there is only one run of the job in the queue at any given time. If a newer run is queued, any previous queued run for that job will be canceled and have a helpful error message displayed:
```

If there is an available run slot and there's not an actively running instance of the job, the Scheduler will prepare the job to run in the user's cloud data platform. This prep involves readying a Kubernetes pod with the right version of dbt installed, setting environment variables, loading data platform credentials, and git provider authorization, amongst other environment-setting tasks. The time it takes to prepare the job is displayed as **prep time.**

Collectively **wait time** and **prep time** is the time a run spends in queue (or **Time in queue**).

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/deployment/deploy-scheduler.jpg" width="85%" title="An overview of a dbt Cloud job run"/>

## Job memory

In dbt Cloud, each run of a job executes in a pod with a default megabyte (MB) memory limit. If a job uses up all of the memory, the pod is terminated with a "memory limit error" message. There isn't a memory limit set at the account-level.

Jobs consume a lot of memory in the following situations:
- A high thread count was specified
- Custom dbt macros attempt to load data into memory instead of pushing compute down to the cloud data platform

> - Generating dbt project documentation when a source's schema has a large number of tables

Author: feeback from @will-sargent-dbtlabs 

```suggestion
- Having a job that generates dbt project documentation for a large and complex dbt project. 
  * To prevent problems with the job running out of memory, we recommend generating documentation in a separate job that is set aside for that task and removing that task from all other jobs. This is especially important for large and complex projects.
```
